# Restaurant Franchising Analysis
Introduction

In the restaurant industry, there are many variables that may directly or indirectly impact success. One key strategy often implemented by business owners is franchising, which is the practice of granting an individual or a company the rights to operate a part or all of their business under its original brand. For smaller businesses, franchising may be beneficial as it offers financial security, business expertise, and more expansion opportunities under established management. Studies show that franchised firms in the hospitality and retail industries typically experience higher profitability compared to non-franchised firms (Hsu & Jang, 2009; Moon & Sharma, 2014). While franchising has resulted in rapid growth in America’s retail and hospitality industries, the question arises of whether franchising increases sales in the restaurant industry as well.

Therefore, the purpose of this project is to explore whether there is a difference in sales between franchised restaurants and non-franchised restaurants across all fast-growing restaurants in America. To examine this potential difference, the mean of sales will be used as the location parameter and the standard deviation of sales will be used as the scale parameter. These parameters are better suited for the data as there does not appear to be a heavy skew with many outliers in the distributions. Furthermore, the values are all away from 0 and are in the range of 20-50 million dollars.

For this exploration, the Future50 dataset will be used, which is a list of the fastest-growing American restaurants in 2020 compiled by Restaurant Business Magazine. Restaurants in this set have between $20-50 million in annual sales and they are ranked based on the greatest difference in system-wide sales from 2018 to 2019. Columns in this dataset include the following attributes:

Rank - Ranking of the restaurant based on system wide sales from 2018-2019
Restaurant - Name of the restaurant brand
Location - City and state where the restaurant is based
Sales - System-wide sales for 2019
YOY_Sales - Year-on-year percentage increase in sales
Units - Number of units (premises)
YOY_Units - Year-on-year percentage increase in units
Unit_Volume - Average unit volume for 2019
Franchising - Whether or not the restaurant brand is franchised
Since sales are the main revenue stream for a restaurant, they are imperative to a company's profitability and overall success. Analyzing sales as a measure of success may provide insight into financially effective business strategies. Therefore, this analysis will use the system-wide sales as a measure of success to be compared between franchised and non-franchised restaurants. This dataset will be treated as a sample of 50 restaurants, of which 29 are franchises and 21 are non-franchises.

Discussion

Overall, the three tests performed are in concurrence with each other, concluding with the inability to reject the null hypothesis as there is no statistically significant difference between the mean sales of franchised and non-franchised restaurants. Although franchised restaurants were expected to perform better, it is evidently not the case based on this analysis.

One possible explanation for this conclusion may be the abnormal shapes of the sample distributions. Although there is no heavy skew, the sample distribution for the franchised restaurants (shown in Figure 1.1) appears multimodal, with one mode centering at ~24 million USD, another at ~38 million USD, and a third at ~43 million USD. The sample distribution for the non-franchised restaurants (shown in Figure 1.2) appears to be bimodal, with modes centering at ~28 million USD and the second at ~39 million USD. The abnormal distributions lower the feasibility of using the mean as a representative measure of the samples, as it can be seen that the modes in the franchised restaurant distribution are generally at higher valuations than the modes in the non-franchised restaurant distribution. However, the sample size is relatively small, making the difference between peaks and troughs relatively marginal.

Another explanation could be attributed to the top ranking performance of the restaurants in the dataset. Since the dataset contains some of the fastest growing restaurants across America, the restaurants included were likely already performing very well solely under their own brand, and franchising may not make a large difference at this point. This effect could be even more apparent at the very top ranks of all fast growing restaurants in America. Thus, this dataset (which does contain the most successful restaurants), would not be a good representation or generalizable to other restaurants or even fast growing restaurants. In addition to this, previous literature has shown an inverted-U relationship between franchising proportion and profitability, where there exists an optimal point for franchising proportion. This means that not all restaurant brands that are franchised are franchised to the same degree, and some may not be meeting the conditions for optimal profitability.

One way to improve this analysis is to use the median and IQR as parameters, rather than the mean and standard deviation. Since the sample distributions were not unimodal, it may have been more viable to use these parameters to summarise the data. Further questions this study could lead to may include exploring the difference in sales between franchised and non-franchised restaurants that are experiencing slow or stagnant growth. Since the purpose of franchising is to offer business expertise and increase their capital growth, the benefits could become more apparent with businesses that have lower capital. Another topic for research could focus on the optimal points of franchising at which profitability is maximized. Businesses can choose to franchise only parts of their brand, which means that not all franchised businesses are equal comparisons, while some may even be losing revenue. However, this relationship and the factors affecting the optimum were not well explored.
